From the current land value, the estimated deconstruction cost of 30‘000‘000 euros that would be required to make the land marketable again can be deducted. Which leads to a land value of 87’000’000 euros for the area of 106’396 square metres. If all of the building‘s area were to be leased with the 1.5% return rate, with 70% efficiency, the city would yearly be paid back 913’000 euros. The average hereditary interest rate for an apartment of 80 square metres would only be 981 euros per year. This would be the minimum value for the rent of the raw structure. Reading the slabs as different plots of land will subject predefined programs such as housing (non-profit foundations, small private de- velopers), logistics, commerce and city infrastructure to different her- editary building law taxations. The taxation can be either calculated by the land value (which currently stands at 817.7 euros per square metre) or based on each rental profit, which would result in an option to use a cross-financing method within the building. Profit is returned to finance the maintenance of structure and utility infrastructure. For the public, this means to control the use and to pre- vent land banking and vacancy.

“Hamburg bietet verschiedene Modelle an: Entweder wird der Erbbaurechtszins komplett im Voraus für 60 Jahre gezahlt, wobei ein Abschlag gewährt wird, oder jährlich, index basiert angepasst. "Derzeit liegt er bei 1,6 Prozent des Grundstückswerts pro Jahr.” (1) The hereditary building right (Erbbaurecht) divides property ownership by separating the land from the building. The hereditary building right grantor is the owner of the land, while the hereditary building right holder owns the buildings. With the hereditary building right contract, the landowner transfers the property to the hereditary building right holder for an agreed period of time. (2) (LEG_C-BND_PRI_Law_UrhG) (3) For the purposes of this Act, ʼrentalʼ means the time limited transfer for use which directly or indirect- ly serves profit making Purposes. ʼLendingʼ within the meaning of sentence 1 means the time limited transfer for use which neither directly nor indirectly serves profit making purposes; section 17 (3) sentence 2 applies accordingly. Usage The hereditary building right contract can spe- cify the type of use, objectives for management, and construction activities. These objectives are binding for the entire duration of the con- tract. Residential, commercial, social, or cultural uses can thus be protected from displacement by future developments. Selected uses are eligible for a reduced interest rate. Interest These objectives are valid for the duration of the hereditary building right and are therefore an essential element of the contract's design. The hereditary building right interest rate is calculated based on the land value and is freely negotiable. It usually ranges from 3 to 6.5 percent annually, depending on the type of use and the objectives. 
 
However, there is also the option to include the cost of the building in the calculation of the hereditary building right interest. If the building requires major renovation, is burdened by contaminated sites, or has other restrictions (e.g., historical preservation or a construction ruin), the value of the building can also be very low. All investment costs, whether for new construction or renovation, are borne by the hereditary building right holder. Office What is the current demand like? Frank Gaster: In HafenCity, which predominantly consists of office projects, the market is difficult at the moment. In the past, large projects with many employees were easier, but we haven't seen such inquiries since the pandemic. Plot sizes of 2,000 to 5,000 square metres are still in demand, especially for craftsmen's yards, where 75 percent of space can be developed specula- tively. And what's the situation like with HafenCity? Frank Gaster: There are challenges in marketing [...]. The office spaces are suffering from the de- clining demand. Such large projects in that form are currently no more attractive. Elbtower None of the participants of the bidding process for the plot of the Elbtower in 2018, was inte- rested in leasing the land to the city's proposed hereditary building right. The city never insisted on its enforcement either. No surprise, it restricts speculation to such a degree, that it becomes irrelevant for high yield investors.