A succession of failure and failure compensation in Fellbach


The First Failure

With the insolvency of  the family run business Ferdinand Fromm GmbH in 1992, the site of around at the Edge of Fellbach measuring 13’500 m2 turns into an empty plot. The name remains. Fromm-Areal. To quickly move past the insolvency of the Fromm family and to utilise the plot, major Friedrich-Wilhelm Kiel quickly finds a new purpose. In the same year of the liberation of the plot, the city agrees to a new development plan and together with VKB-Bauträger GmbH the vision for a hotel complex is set. “Le Village” is projected to provide 215 one-room apartments of higher standard. (1)
Even though during the 90s overnight stay in hotels in the area of Stuttgart almost doubled until the 2000’s, the average bed occupancy rate is 40.8 percent in the year 2000. (2)
To build another hotel in Fellbach, which arguably profits even less from the predicted rise of hotel use than Stuttgart would, is highly speculative. 


The Second Failure

In 1995, after a few years of construction the project came to a halt. In 1996 VKB-Bauträger GmbH files for bankruptcy. The insolvency case was denied with the reason of missing capital in 1997 by the Amtsgericht Stuttgart. Another Failure. 
Images from the 90s showing the inside of the hotel in a devastated state. From today‘s standpoint the images are difficult to interpret. In some corners are tossed with rubbish, others somehow seem to have been appropriated but also vandalised. 
Clearly the state of the building was bad enough to sustain the narrative of failure. To get out of it again, Mayor Friedrich-Wilhelm Kiel starts a new attempt to attract investors. To support a new project with municipal funds would financially not be feasible. Instead he searches for private risk takers who are able to reverse the area‘s former failure into growth. The proposals became megalomaniac and unrealistic: One of them a leisure centre with a desired 2 million visitors per year
Risk-Appetite and Self-Overestimation
The story of overcompensation finally resulted in Mayor Christoph Palm calling the next proposal – a highrise on the plot – the Egg of Columbus when he said: 
“Das ist das Ei des Kolumbus. Eine geniale Städtebauliche Lösung.” (3)


The Third and the Final Failure

The Gewa towers construction stopped in 2016, its restructuring into SLT 107 was faltering and came to a halt in 2023.
The Difficulty of Acceptance
The trend of tackling past financial missteps led to increasingly risky investments and funding strategies. Companies continue to take on substantial debt. CG Group took on a 100% capital debt agreement with Linus Capital, relying therefore on money that lacks tangible value, that is not owned by Linus Capital but paradoxically relies on further debts. 
Persistent beliefs in market stability and continuous growth overshadow more practical concerns about actual demand and the acceptance that some ventures may simply fail. Taking a slower approach could reduce these risks.
But investors acting in the financial economy, which, as we saw before, substantially governs the real economy, are interested in high and fast returns and direct profit. Constant effort to outperform the financial market leads to shorter timed and riskier investments. Which might fail.

For us it‘s important to recognize that choosing de-growth or at least accepting and working with it doesn‘t always signify failure. 
Faced with the most recent failure in Fellbach, and the apparent lack of demand of the type of apartments that were projected in the SLT one wonders: Should we de-grow the site and focus on building up areas that already have a densified demand, or should we instead aim to create and steer demand to existing half-finished environments? 

1) Gerhard Brien und Hans-Dieter Wolz, «Die Geschichte eines Skandalbaus», in Stuttgarter Zeitung, 13.01.2017
2) ()
3) Christoph Palm, cited in «Die Geschichte eines Skandalbaus», in Stuttgarter Zeitung, 13.01.2017
