In a financialised society, capital sets the basis for movement in any direction. Potential energy. Value defines the trajectory. A halted trajectory lets volatile processes condense on their material counterparts. Processes and conditions which were not visual beforehand can now be observed. 
Real Estate projects are financed through two main methods: Debt Financing and Equity Financing. Both regulate the available cash flow for the various stages of the project and create different dependencies for the owner or developer. 


DEBT FINANCING

In Debt Financing money is borrowed from debt holders. Debt holders can be private or institutional and build in most cases the stable basis for a development. 
Any interest rate from debt is tax deductible for the developer as a business expense. Debt comes in forms of bonds with a fixed runtime and a fixed interest rate. Debt Financing is relatively low risk for bond holders, as they must be paid back by the emitter – in real estet the developer – and are generally the first to receive their investment back. In case of insolvency of the emitter, debt holders are often the only ones who receive money generated by the liquidation of the emitter‘s assets.
Debt can be utilised to leverage the return of equity owners. By maximising the amount of debt, the company can keep more of their own equity capital for other projects without messing with the ownership of their assets. 
Debt Holders follow a hierarchy of priority. Senior Debt: Covers the Majority of Construction cost and land cost. Senior debt holders get repaid first on completion. The senior debt is often provided by a bank. In the CG financing plan of SLT, one Debt Holder – Linus Capital – stems all the funding.This is called 100% development finance. Rarely used, the lender provides all of the money required for a development and takes a profit share, usually 50%.
Mezzanine/Junior Debt comes secondary in terms of priority, adding more loans to reduce equity input. Debt always turns out cheaper for the developer so it is ideal, up to a certain amount, to keep a high debt percentage. With a high debt percentage they carry most of the risk themselves. An average relation of debt to equity is around 3.5:1. (1)
CG Group on the SLT 107 worked with debt only, Signa at the Elbtower had a 2:1 model installed.


EQUITY

Equity Financing is based on selling shares of the project. For investors, equity does not need a fixed run time and the interest is based on the final profit of the real estate. Here investors share the risk with the developer, hoping for a much higher return rate than with bonds, investors have to estimate the risk of a “complete” failure. If the developer files for bankruptcy, equity holders are most likely not repaid. 
Shareholders anticipate greater returns as risk escalates. However, developers aim to mitigate risk while minimising costs. For them higher risk means higher cost, liabilities, debts and guarantees chip their profit away. Taking close to no risk means no payout at all. This broad focus on the risk narrative leads to rounding numbers before a project even begins. The Elbphilharmonie would have never been agreed to if the costs were correctly calculated from the very start. 
Instead extreme cases of risk or eventually failure are explained away. In the sense of “it will never happen”. Risk opposes control and safety. Growth is, as much as one would like it to be, never fully controllable. 
The ROE is the most important number for equity holders. It measures how much profit a company generates for every dollar of shareholders‘ equity. For equity holders it is mostly a minimum requirement of 10%. Anything below, is considered poor as bonds would offer similar returns with a much higher security.
The Return on Equity (ROE) is based on the net income of the developer (income after all expenses and debt repayment) divided by the shareholders equity amount. A high ROE can show how efficient a company‘s management is at generating income and growth from its equity financing. If a ROE rises up too high it could signal an unhealthy amount of debt which artificially blows up the supposed capital. (2)


COST OF CAPITAL

The weighted average of a project’s cost of debt and cost of equity is generally the cost of capital. Equity also has a cost, in the form of profit-sharing, and this is the cost of equity or the expected rate of return a fellow owner would expect for a similar risk profile investment. 
The lower your Cost of Capital as an Owner, the higher your profit.


MONOPOLY

A company with high debt might do well during good economic times because it can leverage the debt to achieve growth. However, during a recession or a period of low profits, the burden of debt repayments can make the company less stable, increasing the chance of default or bankruptcy.

CG group took on a 100% financing plan through debt. This completely destabilized during the change in interest rates during inflation after 2020. The fixed costs were hard to hold and their assets were lacking to follow up on their debt responsibility.
After years of trying to get a senior debt holder, such as a bank, to finance part of the capital, GeWa decided to offer the tower‘s shares in the Frankfurt stock exchange. They put up shares of 35 million euros with an interest rate 6,5%. Most of the capital was paid out to the two managing directors over the course of three years. „300.000 € ohne Nachweise“ was one of many transactions being done. More so, of the initial 35 million euros, around 4.5 million were put on a frozen account to repay some of the first interest rates. Another 4.6 million were immediately used to repay the old debt of the GeWa. Private pay outs and frozen assets reduced the freely usable capital to closer around 20 million euros out of the needed 61.5 million euros. The sale of the apartments, 47 of 68, only profited 10 ‚866 million euros. The upper, more expensive apartments were never sold. (3)
Signa managed to secure two debt holders Commerz Real AG and Signal Iduna who together contributed to a ninth of the projected construction costs. Helaba, who was supposed to take on the role of senior debt holder, never closed down on the agreement. Through the ever rising risk, that Signa would not be able to rent out the building after HCOB dropped out, Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen followed the trend. 

According to the project leader for the Elbtower project, the majority of said debts have not yet been used, as Signa Holding financed the initial paid bills out of their own assets.
In summary, high debt increases risk because it adds fixed costs and reduces the company‘s ability to withstand downturns or unexpected challenges. In a stable and predictable environment, high debt serves as a stable basis.
Similarly, the two modes are translated to a lender‘s security. Debt financing is generally secured. If something goes wrong, the secured lender can step in, seize the assets and repay themselves. Equity is full “at risk”; it’s not secured. If something goes wrong, the equity investor is out of luck! They potentially lose everything.
In profit driven developer projects the real clients are the shareholders and debtholders. 

1) https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/real-estate-investment-analysis
2) https://willowdaleequity.com/blog/what-is-a-good-roe-for-real-estate/
3) Archive: ECO_B-FEL_201412_PRI_Jahresabschluss_GEWA
