In Article §19 of the land purchase contract the city of Hamburg has fixed a right to repurchase the sold land in case of delay of construction process. This was to secure the control over the lawful development of the plot as agreed in the annex to the contract and to avoid a construction ruin.   After halt of construction the City of Hamburg filed its repurchase right with the insolvency administrator of the Signa Group as of May 1st 2024. The contractually stipulated period for exercising this option is 9 months, which means that the City of Hamburg must decide before the 31st of January 2025 whether it will buy back the property at the original sales price, free of interest, and practically receive the shell construction and the work carried out to date free of charge. This arguably sounds like an advantageous deal.   However Officials of the City of Hamburg repeatedly expressed that they would much prefer a private investor to take over and complete the construction project. The Investor Klaus-Michael Kühne tried to turn the right to repurchase into an obligation of the city to contribute to the project and to «bring the Elbtower project to a successful conclusion» (1) together with a private investor. He tried to pressure Hamburg into agreeing to rent 50% of the floor area for its public authorities. This has been countered by the mayor Peter Tschentscher who stated: «Mr. Benko, the Signa Group and its investors have caused great damage to the community in Austria and Germany. This does not give rise to any moral position to demand anything from the affected cities or uninvolved third parties». (2) Risk aversion seems to be the main concern of the city. They cannot allow themselves to defend another case like the Elbphilharmonie in front of their citizens. They want a private investor to carry their risk. And first and foremost, they do not want to stir up discontent before the local election on March 2nd 2025.
The Right to Repurchase serves to have influence on the Insolvency Proceedings and to introduce an element of control in the negotiation processes of the insolvency administrator.  According to the City‘s Senator for Urban Development the city has no say whatsoever in the current sales process. As of May 15th 2024, she did not even know who has applied to the insolvency administrator to continue building the Elbtower. With the repurchase right, the city has the opportunity to block the sale of the Elbtower to an investor who does not meet its expectations. It must therefore weigh up whether it is willing to take the risk in order to prevent an unwanted private investor from getting their hands on the tower. While the various voices of city officials not only sound like trying to avert risk but have an undertone of neglect of responsibility, the repurchase right is at least an important factor and a kind of leverage that the insolvency administrator cannot ignore in the negotiation process with future investors. To a certain extent, it forces the insolvency administrator to consider the interests of the city when selecting the buyer.  The city insists on their wish for the project to be finished by a private investor. Politically, it is impossible to use the buy-back right to finish building the tower with taxpayers‘ money. Especially since the Signa Insolvency and following negotiations with potential buyers revealed problems with the economic feasibility of the project. 
Hamburg wants the risk to stay in private hands. The repurchase right is currently considered to be nothing more than a veto right to avoid the worst and is not considered to be a good deal. 
Avoiding risk means avoiding accountability whereas the repurchase at extremely advantageous financial conditions is a chance to glean speculative ruins for the city‘s gains. 


In January 2025 Hamburg extended the timeframe to take a decision until the end of May 2025. The right to repurchase remains a real means of exerting pressure. With the debate about the Natural History Museum moving into the Elbtower, it is becoming increasingly questionable why the city should not make use of its right.

Klaus-Michael Kühne, cited in: https://www.manager-magazin.de/finanzen/immobilien/elbtower-peter-tschentscher-lehnt-klaus-michael-kuehnes-vorschlag-fuer-weiterbau-nach-signa-insolvenz-ab-a-0354e8c0-7928-4974-aa33-00f43a3de49a
Peter Tschentscher, cited in: Ibid.


(«Die Vorstellung, dass die Stadt das Gebäude zurückkauft und dann selbst, auf eigene Kosten ein neues Konzept entwickelt und den Bau vollendet, steht nicht im Raum. Allerdings bleibt das Rückkaufsrecht ein Instrument, das genutzt werden kann – auch als Druckmittel gegenüber einem potenziellen Nachnutzer. Es stellt sich die Frage, ob man die privaten Akteure durch einen Rückkauf aus ihrer Verantwortung entlassen sollte. Die Stadt möchte die Risiken die mit dem Projekt verbunden sind nicht auf sich nehmen.»
Excerpt from Interview with anonymous official of Hamburg Amt für Bauordnung und Hochbau.)