Risk Aversion: 
Shareholders anticipate greater returns as risk escalates. However, developers aim to mitigate risk while minimising costs. For them higher risk means higher cost, liabilities, debts and guarantees chip their profit away. Taking close to no risk means no payout at all.   This broad focus on the risk narrative leads to rounding numbers before a project even begins. The Elbphilharmonie would have never been agreed to if the costs were correctly calculated from the very start. Instead extreme cases of risk or eventually failure are explained away. Risk opposes control and safety. Growth is, as much as one would like it to be, never fully controllable.   The narrative of risk is all about finding the sweet spot, most often at any expense.   While real estate developers need a high profit margin after a relatively short amount of time to repay their debts, cooperatives, construction companies or the city could suffice with smaller profit which feeds directly back into maintenance cost.  In practice, risk is perceived to be higher in transformation projects, because the practice still lacks the methods to precisely assess existing structures. Planning and construction systems do not endorse uncertainty. Even though transformation should not be more expensive, it is unpredictable. Static uncertainties and needs for restructuring can mess up initial projections.   In Fellbach and Hamburg new construction failed. Seen as a more secure and stable process, financial speculation becomes unhinged in real estate projects. In the game of risk, the true winners are the ones which manage to keep the liabilities low and stay away from failure.  

3 Types of Risk Define Construction Ruins
	Risk that defines the dimensioning of the building and the construction process: fire, 	flood, height, …
	Risk that makes the existing unattractive, because it occurs on the built substance in 	transformation projects, but also because the exposed structure might take damage. 
	Risk that we need to deal with in the future, that will make retrofitting necessary: 	change of program and number of people, higher flood levels due to climate change
