History of the Schwabenlandtower
(also called SLT107, formerly called GEWA Tower)
Schorndorfer Strasse 60, 70736, Fellbach, Deutschland
 
In 1967, Ferdinand Fromm GmbH resettles their family business for woodworking machines in the plot between Schorndorfer Strasse and Friedrich-List-Strasse. Twenty years later, in 1992 the company files for bankruptcy. The site of around 13’500 m2 turns into an empty plot. The production hall is removed and with it the small administration office. Only the name remains: Fromm-Areal. Under the major Friedrich-Wilhelm Kiel the site quickly finds a new purpose. In the same year of the liberation of the plot, the city agrees to a new development plan and together with VKB-Bauträger GmbH the vision for a hotel complex is set. “Le Village” is projected to provide 215 one-room apartments of higher standard.
 
In 1995, after a few years of construction the project came to a halt. In 1996 VKB-Bauträger GmbH files for bankruptcy. The insolvency case was denied with the reason of missing capital in 1997 by the Amtsgericht Stuttgart. The creditors ended up without compensation and VKB-bauträger GmbH had to close all business.
 
An unfinished concrete structure of three stories remains. It remains roofless and is soon infested with rats. To attract new investors, major Kiel proposes “Heron-City” a funpark and shopping center including a cinema with up to 4000 seats. Creating a new attraction center outside Stuttgart with up to two million visitors. Called megalomaniac at the time, the project never manages to leave its early stage. 

Up until 2006 the site remains as is. Kiel left office in 2000 and was replaced by Christoph Palm. After a successful project of the developer Michael G. Warbanoff not far from Fellbach, he proposes to replicate his last success. Welcomed from the municipality, the plot was sold for two million euros or 177,78 euros per square metre. Although the plot is in a remarkably unfavourable location this was very far below standard land value in Fellbach, which was around 580 €/m2 in 2014. Nevertheless arguments are made that to compensate for the site and demolition costs, a tower should max out the plot. The Fellbach municipal council agrees to a new development plan on the 7th November 2006 and again on the 8th May 2007.
 A first proposal encompasses 240 rental apartments, distributed on the site in smaller apartment blocks and one tower. In addition the plan entails a hotel and a medical centre. The tower, planned by Wolf Architekten, is supposed to measure 85 metres. 
 
Christoph Palm is euphoric about the proposal, suggesting to finally having found an easy way to deal with the doomed plot, when he says: “Das ist das Ei des Kolumbus. Eine geniale Städtebauliche Lösung.” (1)
 
Shortly after the publication of the project in Fellbacher Stadtanzeiger, the political minority (SPD and die Grüne) starts an initiative “Fellbach ist nicht Manhatten”, supported by a large part of Fellbach‘s population. They manage to accumulate a total of  3.950 signatures. The City of Fellbach aswell as the Regional Council of Stuttgart deny the petition for referendum and the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart finally nullifies the initiative, as of a missed deadline. In addition, according to the Baden-Württemberg municipal code, citizens‘ petitions on development plans are inadmissible. (2)
 
For two years, following the crash in 2008, the tower project was halted. On paper it grows larger and is now projected to be 107 metres, the third largest residential building in Germany. 
 
In the search for capital, GeWa turns to the Frankfurter Börse. One of their former obligors, a large bank, left negotiations. The 2008 crisis still resonates and banks are acting more cautiously in this economic climate. Due to the new European Commission regulations under the BASEL III Regulation, banks are refraining from such project financing because they lack the so-called ‘proof of concept’. (3) «The Basel standards are the set of international banking regulations developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision for minimum bank capital adequacy. The goal of these standards is to enhance banks’ ability to withstand financial shocks and reduce the likelihood of a new global financial crisis.» (4)
Previously reliable growth opportunities can no longer be trusted. GeWa plans to finance their project through bonds carrying a value of 35 million Euros. The bondholders are offered a package of securities that is managed by a trustee. At the time Bonds collateralized with real estate seem to combine the best of both worlds: Stability with a generous fixed annual interest rate of 6% and more. The GeWa 5to1 bonds have a runtime of 4 years and an interest rate of 6.5%. A survey confirms the projected value of € 66.5 million.(5) However several real estate magazines warn of possible risks.(6)
The minimum volume for the bond issues to be emitted is 30 mio Euros. All of the bonds are sold, reaching the maximum value of 35 million Euros. 
 
To avoid a new construction ruin the municipality of Fellbach demands various financing plans. All of them pass the bar. Of 65 condominiums, 28 are pre-sold and an advance of 10.900.000 in total is payed. In May 2014 construction starts with Baresel as a general contractor. 
 
The peripheral buildings on the plot consist of 152 rental apartments in seven low rise houses and is realised by the company Weisenburger from Rastatt. Gewa is uninvolved in its completion. Construction runs independently from the tower and is finished in the beginning of 2017 (7) and fully inhabited soon. 
 
On the 14th of November 2016, two months after the topping out ceremony GeWa announces the complete halt of the construction. By then the building had reached its full height and the façade company FKN had delivered the substantial part of the windows, the façade glass panels and the fall protection. As a company representative tells us on the phone, the company learned about the continuation of the project through the press later and was not involved in demounting the façade in 2023. 
 
Up to this date GeWa had demented any Problem. (8) Four days later the company files for bancrupcy. Today an indictment for alleged protraction of insolvency is being examined in court.
 
As a matter of fact GeWa – after selling the 28 apartments before emitting the bond – only sold ten more in the following ten months, just another six until February 2016 and a final one before construction stopped. In total 44 apartments were sold until 2016, but GeWa remained stuck with the luxurious ones that were on the market for a square meter price of around 7800 Euros. 
 
Of the total budget for the tower about 9 mio were used for interest payments and to repay old loans. On the 30th of June, the company‘s cash and cash equivalents amounts to 5.2 million euros. (9) For the towers completion the missing sum is impossible to raise. After almost ten years of advertising there is no perspective on selling the luxury apartments on the upper floors. 
The bond price falls from 79 to around 26 per cent on 14 November 2016. The bond is collateralised with a land charge and the use of funds is under trusteeship.
 
Completion was originally planned for 2016. Warbanoff intends to complete the project as part of orderly insolvency proceedings.

In the 2016 municipal elections Mayor Christoph Palm is not running again. Gabriela Zull is elected as Mayor. She will be re-elected for her third term of office in September 2024. She was the only candidate.
 
Insolvency administrator Ilkin Banyarali sells tower to CG as announced on 2 February 2019 at a price of 15 million euros. The CG Group first reverses the purchase of the flats in order to take full ownership of the tower and repais all 44 flat owners their down payments plus five per cent, which amounts to an estimated 10.9 million euros. 
In April 2019 CG group transfers a first 10 million euros. Beforehand the repayment was repeatedly postponed. Interest will be paid on the money still outstanding, as well as on the total amount. For the remaining amount a daily interest rate of 1333 euros has been agreed with the CG group, as lawyer Gustav Meyer zu Schwabendissen explains according to an article published in Stuttgarter Zeitung. The creditors can now count on a reimbursement of maximum 40% of the original bond price. (10)  

From now on, the Gewa Tower will be called ‘SLT 107 Schwabenlandtower’. The rents in the 192 flats are set to be between 16 and 25 euros per square meter. (11)
The aim of the new name in reference to the successful event location named Schwabenlandhalle is to connect with the emotional identity of the Fellbach residents, who have observed the standstill on the construction site with growing concern and anger.

According to a press release from December 2019 by Linus Capital, they have structured a whole-loan financing totalling 85 million euros. The whole loan serves to refinance the existing acquisition financing and to finance the construction costs until completion. The loan is issued by the EUR 350 million debt fund managed by Linus Capital and by an institutional co-investor who has already invested with Linus Capital on several occasions.
 
Immediately after purchasing the 34-storey building, the investor Christoph Gröner decided that the concrete roof at the top would have to go. A ‘half red dot’ (German building permit) is issued for this even before the actual approval of the supplementary building application. Due to falcons nesting on the roof of the tower, the demolition has to comply with extended conditions imposed by the nature conservation organisation.

Through 2019, existing partition walls are removed, pipes filled up and new holes drilled. By the end of 2019 the building is considered “winter proof”. 
Due to constant changes of plans, the planning permission granted in early summer 2019, is followed by further supplementary building permits. For each new permit an according building release has to be issued, which further slows down the adaptation process.

When a total of 40 specialist engineers scrutinizes the old plans, the entire facade “fails to pass”. Building work is now being carried out in accordance with the KfW 55 energy standard. While the previous façade would have met this standard, due to the reconfiguration of the tower it however was decided that it would have to be replaced with a new one. The new facade is advertised with higher sustainability standards. (see 05 Material Mass: Facades) The removal of the old façade and the installation of the new façade are planned to be carried out in parallel. (Status 2020) 
Completion is now projected for the end of 2020.

In 2020 Consus Real Estate takes over CG Group and fuses with Adler Group little later.
 
In August 2020 an Article in the Immobilien Zeitung critically reviewed the practice of Adler Group, who buy up undeveloped properties in German city centres on a grand scale. The sellers are listed companies whose board members are used to working for companies owned by other rich Austrians. The sites are not built on, only the valuations increase. Land Banking. (12)
 
After further construction delays due to the takeover and the covid crisis, the new completion is now planned for Q2. 2023.
 
In July 2022 first doubts about Adlers financial situation are raised. Mayor Zull comments on this according to an article published in the local newspaper Fellbacher Stadtanzeiger: «We are not naïve and we know the reports about the Adler Group, but their statements are clear - the tower will be completed». Realistically, there was no other option. She furter statet that «In the current economic climate, no other investor is likely to take over the building and the city would not be able to afford this financial feat. Because then we would have to refrain from many mandatory tasks - such as building kindergartens or renovating schools». (13)
 
In February 2023, Adler Group ran into financial difficulties and considered selling the tower.
Following a court ruling in London, the Adler Group is allowed to save itself from insolvency and take on new debt. This leads to reorganisation proceedings.

On 28 June 2023, criminal prosecutors raided various Adler Group properties for possible false accounting, market manipulation and breach of trust. At this point, the Group‘s crisis has virtually turned into a total loss for shareholders. (14)
In July 2023 the crane is demounted.
 
The old facade is demounted in summer 2023. The new one remains missing. 
At first this is taken as a sign for the final destruction of the tower. But the press – invited to document previous construction progress – and utilised to advertise the new concept and the progressing construction quickly issues articles about the ongoing conversion.
  
The SLT 107 is still enlisted on the website of Adler Group (15) with completion predicted in the last quarter of 2024. It is advertised with 15900m2 usable area, a value of 65.000.000 and a rental price of approximately 4000 Euro per square metre.
In hope of being able to sell the half-finished properties, Adler Group keeps them accounted as investment properties and not as assets for sale. Because they cannot then be valued differently from their predicted value and the company is able to stretch creditors’ claims pretending to be worth more than they actually are. 
 
Up until today no investor has been found. And since the demounting of the facade in 2023 no building activity followed. 


1)   Christoph Palm, cited in «Die Geschichte eines Skandalbaus», in Stuttgarter Zeitung, 13.01.2017
2) 	https://verwaltungsgericht-stuttgart.justiz-bw.de/pb/,Lde/1219156/
3)	https://www.finanzen.net/nachricht/anleihen/interview-gewa-tower-gute-aussichten-fuer-anleger-und-kaeufer-3358193
4)	https://finance.ec.europa.eu/news/basel-iii-2024-07-25_en
5)	Archive: ECO_B-FEL_PRI_Rating_Gewa
6)	https://www.iz.de/finanzen/news/kapitalmarktfinanzierung-risiko-mittelstandsanleihe-122821
7)	https://www.stuttgarter-zeitung.de/inhalt.gewa-tower-in-fellbach-schlagzeilentraechtiges-skandalgrundstueck.1ffd752c-0e16-4903-a7bb-4fcd1b8b7c88.html
8)	https://www.faz.net/aktuell/finanzen/anleihen-zinsen/mittelstandsanleihen/insolvenzantrag-gewa-stuerzt-ab-14537918.html
9)	Ibid.
10)	https://www.stuttgarter-zeitung.de/inhalt.schwabenlandtower-in-fellbach-gewa-glaeubiger-sehen-erstmals-geld-wieder.ec88cdf6-de00-4809-adb9-8ecc732a8adf.html
11)	https://www.zvw.de/lokales/fellbach/gewa-tower-f%C3%BCr-15-millionen-verkauft-und-mit-neuem-namen_arid-63919
12)	Monika Leykam https://www.iz.de/projekte/news/-das-spiel-mit-den-grundstuecken-157440
13)	Stadtverwaltung Fellbach, «Schwabenlandtower: Es gibt keine realistische Alternative», in Fellbacher Stadtanzeiger, 06.07.2022
14)	https://www.nzz.ch/wirtschaft/grossrazzia-bei-immobilienkonzern-adler-behoerden-durchsuchen-bueros-ld.1744752
15)	https://www.adler-group.com/schwabenlandtower, accessed 21.08.2024