Exchange Value

There is an underlying assumption and belief that real estate is a secure asset through the sole argument that it has a material countervalue which presumably can serve as an inflation hedge. But space is commodified to such an extent that this real countervalue becomes near worthless as the buildings enter a purely speculative realm. And the necessity for space is overleveraged to generate profit ex-nihilo.
Exchange value refers to the market value of a building. In capitalist societies, architecture is treated as a product for buying, selling, and investment.
The exchange value abstracts the value of architecture and subordinates it to the global financial market, thus making it diverge from actual use value and other values. It relies on sophisticated financial instruments that extract value from all possible assets and is more generally driven by global finance market behaviour. A leveraging of risk and profit is crucial in real estate: While capital market developments remain fluctuating, the liability of profit calculation depends on investments into the inert material. Exchange value is subject to speculation. It can be increased with the endorsement of uncertainty. It relies on location which benefits from evolving tangible and intangible factors: Values that are created collectively but extracted by few dominant forces in the finance economy. 
Exchange value gained importance with the rise of capitalism and modern real estate markets in the late 19th century. Urban land speculation and property development became major industries during industrialization. With the global growth of the finance sector at expense of the significance of the real economy, speculative finance and exchange value today plays a crucial role in how we understand our built environment.
In Architektur als Gebrauchswert: Zur Praktognosie materieller Kultur, 1979 the architectural historian Eduard Führ positions architecture as a form of use value. He argues that buildings, structures, and architectural works have a functional purpose within society, providing spaces for human activities such as living, working, and socialising. Unlike commodities that are produced primarily for their exchange value (as in capitalism as we know it), architecture is evaluated based on its practical, utilitarian value – its ability to meet human needs and facilitate everyday life. (1)
Architecture in a system that prioritises the production of space over the reinforcement of growth – would be relieved from fictitious pressures because its purpose and value would no longer be driven by profit and capital accumulation alone.
Architecture’s exchange value would not disappear entirely, but its role would change in significant ways, making it different from other tradable assets, commodities or services that might still be market-driven and as such remain part of the financial economy and not the real economy.
Shifting the exchange value, to represent other values, would reflect long-term usefulness, social significance, and ecologic viability and thus counter the overpowering of the exchange value and the resulting speculative production of space. 
Construction ruins‘ exchange value – composed out of the properties interest rate and potential rental profit gains – is nullified. Their spatial planning according to faux or embellished calculations enters the realm of purposelessness and becomes purely monumental. Their newfound lack of demand exposes the building‘s intrinsic material values. Here, the gap between the financial market and the real market narrows.


Use Value (Gebrauchswert)

Use value refers to the practical utility of a building, focusing on how well it serves the needs of its inhabitants or functions for its intended purpose. Influenced by societal needs, and demographic and economic conditions. It increases when the programming of a building and its utility and functionality are best aligned with users requirements. Use value therefore depends as much on demand as on architectural quality.
Use value has always been fundamental to architecture, but it became central in the context of modernism and functionalism in the 20th century. Figures like Le Corbusier and the Bauhaus emphasised function over ornament, advocating for «form follows function».


Material Value / Cost (Materialwert)

The Material value of a building is derived from the sum and composition of physical materials used in a building and their inherent qualities, such as durability, aesthetic appeal and responsible sourcing.
Material value in a building is dynamic and influenced by various factors, including quality, ethical and ecological viability, aesthetics, and market trends. Today a building‘s intrinsic material worth can no longer simply be informed by each component‘s material cost but must be informed by the composition of components and by the building‘s durability, overall adaptability and component reusability, depending on the intended lifespan of a building. Separation of layers of different lifespans and openness for repair play an increasingly crucial role.
Material value has been essential throughout architectural history. While in ancient and classical architecture emphasis on high-quality stone, timber, or metals dominated material value considerations, durability has been gradually undermined by material and economic performance. Especially in speculative architecture, where the clients of an investor are no longer the users of the building but the shareholders of the corporation, material cost is kept to a minimum, its value has been rationalised and subordinated due to shrinking lifespans of buildings. With the challenges of the climate crisis, the classical concept of material value took on new importance.


Labor Value / Cost (Arbeitswert)

Labour value refers to the human effort, skill, and time invested in constructing a building. It can reflect both the manual labour involved in construction and the intellectual labour of design. 
Labour value reflects the tensions between labour as a source of wealth creation and the capitalist imperative to maximise profit by controlling labour costs and increasing productivity. The balance between labour and material costs in speculative architecture, particularly under the influence of standardisation and prefabrication, has profound implications for how labour value is perceived and represented. A commodified architecture that prioritises efficiency over artistry and individuality, visibly neglects labour value.
Visiting the construction site in Hamburg, we talked to a few of the construction workers currently cleaning and securing the site. One, who was open to talk to us a bit longer, is a guest worker from Moldavia, who just joined the works two weeks ago and will most likely move to the next site in one or two weeks. “As soon as my work here is done”, he mentioned. 
Labor’s role in architecture can and should evolve from being purely an economic cost to a multifaceted source of social, environmental, and cultural significance. With increasing importance of adaptability, material durability and social value, intellectual and physical labour value gains importance for architecture and construction, even though it is still lacking according compensation as a result of the commodification of architecture and the according overvaluation of exchange value.
Appreciation for the skill of craftsmen in traditional architecture has been present for centuries. The importance of labour value became a critical concept with the rise of Marxist thought in the 19th century, as Marxists examined the exploitation of labour in capitalist societies. William Morris and others in the Arts and Crafts movement were influenced by Marx, particularly in their socialist critiques of capitalism. They extended Marx’s ideas to include a deeper appreciation for the aesthetic and ethical dimensions of labour, emphasising the importance of restoring craftsmanship and creative work. Thus, while the Arts and Crafts movement and Marx shared common ground in their critique of industrial capitalism, their views on labour’s value diverged, with Marx emphasising class struggle and exploitation, (2) and Arts and Crafts advocates focusing on craftsmanship and artistic labour. Both are responses to the increasing alienation of the worker from the product. Today with an increasing specialisation we witness the acceleration of that process. This becomes a driving force especially in speculative projects, where a complex chain of small responsibility leads to a seemingly rigid unsteerable system and a loss of influence on the trajectory at large. 


Social Value (Gesellschaftswert)

Social value relates to how architecture fosters social interaction, community, and well-being. It refers to buildings that contribute positively to society by providing spaces for human connection, public engagement, or social equality. Kant’s right to personality implies that social value lies in supporting both individual dignity and a collective sense of belonging. (3)
The behaviour of social value in architecture is fluid and context-dependent, shaped by how a building or space responds to the needs and dynamics of the community it serves. A building’s social value grows as it generates a sense of belonging, enhances community cohesion, supports marginalised populations, fosters exchange and constructive confrontation and adapts to the evolving social landscape. According to Hannah Arendt’s ideas about rights, belonging, and public-private life, dignified housing is essential for individual autonomy, participation in collective life, and the ability to belong to a community. 
The idea became particularly significant during the 20th century, especially in the context of public housing, urban planning movements, and post-war reconstruction efforts. The garden city movement and postmodern critiques of modernist urbanism emphasised social value.


Cultural Value (Kulturwert)

Cultural value relates to how architecture represents the identity, beliefs, traditions, or artistic achievements of a particular group or society. It connects buildings to broader cultural or symbolic meanings. 
Do we need memorials for a post-capitalist world?
Cultural value is ascribed to a building by a specific group of people. While it can serve as a unifying value within a society it is also exclusive. Architects and governments often use buildings to preserve cultural memory or project cultural power. Today cultural value can no longer be narrowly defined by the dominant or elite culture. In more inclusive approaches, cultural value is defined by recognizing diverse narratives, including those of marginalised groups, and emphasising the evolving and hybrid nature of architecture. Buildings are valued not just for their symbolic representation of elite or national cultures, but also for their role in everyday cultural practices, their significance in resistance or liberation struggles, and their embodiment of local, indigenous, and hybrid identities.
Cultural value has always been present in architecture, but it gained particular prominence and impact during periods of nationalism and colonialism, where architecture was seen as an expression of national or cultural identity often in delimiting, classicising or otherwise discriminating ways. Formerly ascribed cultural value is therefore today often a contested topic, but can be reconfigured and understood in a more inclusive and non-exclusive way, especially when considering post-colonial perspectives.


Age Value (Alterswert)

Appreciation of a building for its visible signs of age and patina, celebrating the passage of time and transience. It values the wear and tear as a testament to the passage of time, which evokes a sense of history and continuity. «Naturgesetzlicher Kreislauf des Werdens und Vergehens erfreut die Wahrnehmung des Menschen» (4)
Age value produces an emotional reaction in the observer, eliciting feelings of nostalgia, reverence, or respect for the monument’s longevity. For Riegl, this value is rooted not in the original artistic or historical intentions of the builders but in the gradual transformation of the monument over time. In contrast to historical value, age value is not scientifically exclusive. (5)  Alterswert wird durch zunehmende Auflösung immer weniger extensiv, dafür immer mehr intensiv. (6)

The concept of age value emerged as part of a broader shift in how history and heritage were perceived, focusing on the natural ageing process rather than attempts to restore the past to its original form. In romanticism, due to a new emphasis on emotional experience, age became valuable. This value became especially significant in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with the rise of the preservation movement, spearheaded by figures like John Ruskin, who valued the historical authenticity of buildings. Alois Riegl, who laid the base for a contemporary understanding of heritage preservation, laid focus on the age value. Age value contrasts with modernist approaches, and capitalist value logic which focuses on the new or value of newness. This shows that when narratives of growth prevail, age has negative connotations and is not valued.
If in years from now the narrative of growth will be perceived as a history of gluttony, then perhaps, age value will have a whole new meaning as it stands not just for the passing of time but also for durability and the persistence through time.
